A man of understanding acquires skillful direction.
What is understanding?
Webster's dictionary defines it as the act of grasping mentally,
or the power of comprehending, analyzing, distinguishing, and judging.
Insight on the scriptures picks up on that concept of distinguishing
and indicates that a person with understanding can see into a matter
and figure out how individual components of a situation work
to create the entire situation.
To illustrate, a person who understands construction
sees not just a building, but an infrastructure, a design.
He comprehends engineering, power, water, ventilation.
He understands how all of these systems work together
and thus he can either marvel at the structure or point out where more work is needed.
That's a valuable attribute, understanding.
So why does a person with understanding need skillful direction?
A person with understanding knows four things.
Let's consider them together.
First, he understands his own responsibility to think.
Second, he understands what he lacks.
Third, he understands what Jehovah can impart,
and he also understands what others can provide.
Let's take those one by one.
To begin, please turn to Mark 12.
Now here Jesus has just explained to one of the scribes
what constitutes the greatest commandment in the law.
Now note the scribes' acknowledgement here in verse 33.
And to love him, God, with one's whole heart,
with one's whole understanding, and with one's whole strength,
and to love one's neighbor as oneself is worth far more
than all the whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
Yes, Jehovah expects us to use our brains,
to exercise our consciences, to render sacred service with our power of reason,
as Hebrews 121 puts it.
So the man of understanding does not expect everybody else to do all the thinking for him.
That is not why he seeks skillful direction on the contrary.
He takes the time to meditate.
He does as much thinking as his Bible-trained conscience is capable of.
He understands what he lacks.
He understands that Jehovah expects him to love with his entire understanding.
Now perhaps at this point, you may be thinking to yourself,
what about Proverbs 3.5 that says that we must not lean or rely on our own understanding?
Well, that leads to our second point.
The understanding person knows what he does not understand.
He knows what he lacks. Turn please to Proverbs chapter 19.
And see how this is borne out in the following verse.
Proverbs chapter 19 and verse 25.
It says strike the ridiculer so that the inexperienced one may become shrewd
and reproof the understanding one so that he will increase in knowledge.
Now a ridiculer just mocks people who think differently.
Slapping him serves as a warning to the inexperienced person.
But even an understanding person needs, as it says,
reproof because he doesn't know everything.
A man of understanding knows what he doesn't know.
He realizes that he may not have all the facts.
He probably doesn't know all of the circumstances.
He hasn't seen things through the eyes of other people and he certainly cannot read parts.
So what is needed?
Skillful direction. Proverbs 11-14 says where there is no,
or when there is no skillful direction, the people fall.
But there is success through many advisers.
Now each of us does well to think about this when we're on the phone with
or when we're writing a letter to an individual, a body of elders,
another department at Bethel, a branch, brothers in general.
Rather than judging them, appreciate their trust,
credit them with intelligence, experience, spirituality,
seek insight from people who have seen things from their perspective,
acquire skillful direction.
More over, notice what it says in chapter 21 and verse 2.
Proverbs 21-2, because we're imperfect,
we don't even realize how limited our own viewpoints appear to other people.
Thus it says, all of a man's ways seem right to him,
but Jehovah examines the hearts.
And that leads us to our third point.
A man of understanding knows what Jehovah can impart.
Now knowing that we lack wisdom are very first.
Primary course of action is the one stated at James 1-5.
If anyone of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep on asking God,
for he gives generously to all and without reproaching.
Understanding has a source.
What is the source of understanding?
Job chapter 28 asks that question twice.
And the conclusion of that chapter says that the fear of Jehovah,
is wisdom and to turn away from bad, is understanding.
The Psalmist sang, disclosure of your words gives,
like giving understanding to the inexperienced Psalm 119, verse 130.
And we can't discount what we might call the Bezilell factor.
Jehovah can enhance our understanding with his Holy Spirit
and even qualify us to teach others.
So we trust Jehovah's wisdom.
Be careful never to assume that while the Bible is excellent,
sometimes it doesn't go far enough.
Jesus stamped God's Word as truth.
And we'll come back to this point in a minute.
But now the Bible also indicates that it is proper to learn from experts.
That's our fourth point.
An understanding person understands what others can offer.
Job 1212 says, is not wisdom found among the aged?
Does not understand income with long life?
So each of us does well to ask himself,
have I consulted with older ones?
Do I associate with them generally?
If not, am I missing something?
What about people who have experience in finance, mechanics,
construction, design, linguistics, writing, music,
any number of other topics?
Would there be any objection to seeking skillful direction from such experts?
Well, no.
A man of understanding acquires skillful direction.
First Chronicles 25, 7 and 8 talks about musicians who were trained.
All experts.
And that is in Hebrew the same word that's translated as understanding.
Daniel chapter 1 indicates that Nebuchadnezzar's chief court official,
Ashpinaz instructed Daniel Hannonaya Mishail and Aziraya in the writing
and the language of the Caldians.
So receiving skillful direction, even from people who do not yet know and love Jehovah,
is not condemned.
A person with understanding understands what others can offer.
But he also realizes that there are limits to what they can offer.
If you're still in Proverbs chapter 21, notice verse 30,
which says, there is no wisdom, nor discernment,
nor counsel in opposition to Jehovah.
So if ever there is a conflict between a so-called expert and Bible principles,
Bible principles should always win.
If a written commentary maligns an inspired Bible writer,
we reject that criticism.
If a medical procedure violates God's laws, we keep looking for one that doesn't,
because there is no wisdom, discernment, or counsel in opposition to Jehovah.
So by way of review, what is understanding?
It's the ability to distinguish how various factors work together to create a situation.
What does the man who acquires understanding or skillful direction understand?
He understands his responsibility to think.
He understands what he lacks.
He understands what Jehovah can impart, and he understands what others can provide.
How grateful we are that understanding itself is built into Jehovah's regulations.
And as we keep those regulations, as Moses said at Deuteronomy 4.6,
others will hear about this and say, this nation is undoubtedly a wise and understanding people.